- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science
and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a Professor of
Neurobiology and Ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
My guest today is Dr. David Buss.
Doctor Buss is a Professor of Psychology
at the University of Texas, Austin,
and he is one of the founding
members and luminaries
in the field of evolutionary psychology.
Doctor Buss's laboratory is responsible
for understanding the
strategies that humans use
to select mates in the
short- and long-term.
And he is an expert in sex
differences in mating strategy.
His laboratory has explored for instance,
why women cheat on their spouses
or their long-term partners,
as well as why men tend to cheat
on their spouses and long-term partners.
He's also explored a
number of things related
to the courtship dance that we call dating
and securing a mate,
including the use of deception
related to proclamations of love
or promises of finances
or sexual activity.
Doctor Buss's laboratory
has also evaluated
how status is assessed,
meaning how we evaluate our own worth,
and our potential as a mate, and who is,
let's just say within
range of a potential mate,
both in the short- and long-term.
For instance, today we
talk about how people
don't just make direct assessments
of their own and other people's
value as a potential mate,
but also using the assessments of others
to indirectly determine whether or not
they stand a chance or
not in securing somebody
as a short- or long-term mate.
His laboratory has also focused on
some of the complicated
and varied emotions
related to mating,
love, and relationships,
such as lust and jealousy.
And he's extensively explored
something called mate poaching,
or the various strategies
that men and women use
to make sure that the person
that they want to be with,
or the person they are with,
is not with anyone else
or seeking anyone else,
and indeed that other people
don't seek their mate.
Doctor Buss's work also relates
to how biological
influences, such as ovulation
or time within the menstrual cycle
influences mate selection
or tendency to have sex or not
with a potential short- or long-term mate.
And more recent work from
Doctor Buss's laboratory
focuses on the darker aspects of mating
and sexual behavior in humans,
including stalking and sexual violence.
Today, we discuss all those topics.
We also discuss some of the
strategies that humans can use
to make healthy mate selection choices,
and for those that are already
in committed relationships
to ensure healthy progression
of those committed relationships.
In addition to publishing dozens
of landmark scientific studies,
Doctor Buss has authored
many important books,
a few of those include,
The Evolution of Desire,
and Why Women Have Sex.
And his most recent book
is the one that I'm reading
now, which is called,
When Men Behave Badly: The Hidden Roots
of Sexual Deception,
Harassment, and Assault.
And it's an absolutely fascinating read.
It has endorsements from
Doctor Robert Sapolsky,
Professor at Stanford,
who's been on this
podcast as a guest before,
as well as Steven Pinker
and Jonathan Haidt,
who wrote The Coddling
of the American Mind.
It's a really important book I believe,
and one that doesn't just
get into the darker aspects
of human mating behavior and violence,
but also strategies that
people can take to ensure
healthy mating behavior and relationships.
There's so much rumor, speculation,
and outright fabrication of ideas
about why humans select particular mates
in the short- and long-term,
what men and women do
differently, and so on.
What I love about Doctor Buss's work
is that it's grounded
in laboratory studies
that are highly quantitative
using rigorous statistics.
And so throughout today's discussion,
you'll notice that I'm
wrapped with attention,
trying to extract as
much information as I can
from Doctor Buss about the real science
of human mate selection
and mating strategy.
I'm certain that everyone will take away
extremely valuable
knowledge that they can use
in existing or future relationships
from this discussion with Doctor Buss.
Before we begin,
I'd like to emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching
and research roles at Stanford.
It is however, part of
my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information
about science and science-related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the
sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Roka.
Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses
that are the absolute highest quality.
I've spent a lifetime
working on the visual system,
and I can tell you that
the cells and connections
of our brain and visual system
have to contend with an
enormous number of challenges
in order to see clearly.
For instance, when you go from
a brightly lit environment
to a dimmer environment or into a shadow,
your visual system has to adjust.
The problem with a lot of sunglasses
and eyeglasses out there
is that they don't work
well with those adjustments.
Roka has overcome those
challenges, and as a consequence,
no matter what environment you're in,
you see with crystal clarity.
Roka eyeglasses and
sunglasses are also terrific
because they are extremely lightweight,
so you don't even notice
that they're on your face.
And they can be worn when
working or for school
or just walking about, but
also when running or cycling.
And indeed, if you get sweaty,
they won't slip off your face.
That's a terrific feature,
but they can be worn to do anything.
I wear readers at night,
and sometimes when I drive at night,
and a wonderful thing about
Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses
is that unlike a lot of other
performance glasses out there
that make people look like cyborgs,
or make it look like you're
definitely off to exercise,
Roka eyeglasses and
sunglasses have a range
of terrific aesthetics that
you could wear anywhere.
If you'd like to try Roka eyeglasses,
you can go to roka.com,
that's roka.com and
enter the code Huberman
to save 20% off your first order.
That's Roka, roka.com,
and enter the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's podcast is also
brought to us by InsideTracker.
Inside tracker is a
personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer
in getting regular blood work done,
for the simple reason
that many of the factors
that strongly impact your
immediate and long-term health
can only be assessed from
a quality blood test.
And nowadays with the
advent of modern DNA tests,
you can get additional information
about how your body and
your nervous system work,
your immune system,
in ways that can inform
better health choices.
The problem with a lot of
blood and DNA tests out there
is that you don't get any information
about what to do with
the data that you get.
Inside Tracker solves that problem.
They have a very easy to use dashboard,
so when you get your numbers back,
it can direct you towards
specific nutrition,
supplementation, or lifestyle
changes that you can make
in order to bring the numbers
for given hormones, metabolic factors,
immune factors into the
range that's ideal for you.
If you'd like to try InsideTracker,
go to insidetracker.com/huberman
to get 25% off any of
InsideTracker's plans,
that's insidetracker.com/huberman
to get 25% off.
Today's episode is also
brought to us by Headspace.
Headspace is a meditation
app that's supported
by 25 peer-reviewed published studies,
and benefits from over
600,000 five star reviews.
There is now a plethora of scientific data
pointing to the fact that a
regular meditation practice
is immensely beneficial
for reducing anxiety,
improving sleep, improving focus,
many, many other aspects of
mental and physical health.
The challenge many people have, however,
is maintaining a regular
meditation practice.
And indeed, I am one of those people.
I've been meditating on
and off for about 30 years,
and I confess a lot of
times it's more off than on,
until a few years ago
when I started using the Headspace app,
and then I found it very easy,
and I continue to find it easy
to maintain a daily meditation practice.
And that's because Headspace
has many meditations to select from.
So even if I only have
five minutes or 15 minutes,
I'm able to do a meditation.
I really enjoy those meditations,
and I always see the benefits
of those meditations.
In fact, if I just miss a couple of days,
I start to notice that
I'm not doing as well
as when I'm meditating regularly.
The Headspace app makes
it exceedingly easy
to meditate regularly.
If you want to try Headspace,
you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer.
And if you do that,
you'll get a free one-month trial
with Headspace's full
library of meditations
for every situation.
That's the best offer they have right now.
So again, if you're interested,
go to headspace.com/specialoffer today.
And now my conversation
with Doctor David Buss.
David, delighted to be here.
I've followed your work
for a number of years,
and I'm excited to ask
you a number of questions
about these super interesting topics
about how people select mates,
how they lie, cheat,
and, but also behave well
in this dance that we call mate choice.
- Yes, fortunately, there
are well-behaving humans
in the mix here.
- Good to know.
Just to start off,
perhaps you could just
orient us a little bit
about mate choice.
You know, some of the primary criteria
that studies show men and women use
in order to select mates,
both, shall we call them transient mates
as well as lifetime mates?
- Right, well, that's
a critical distinction,
because what people look for
in a long-term committed mateship,
like a marriage partner or a
long-term romantic relationship
is different from what people look for
in a hookup or casual sex,
or one night stand, or
even a brief affair.
So that's actually critical.
I wonder if we could maybe
just back up a second
and just talk a little bit
about the theoretical framework
for understanding mate choice.
So it basically stems from
Darwin's theory of sexual selection,
and most people, when they
think about evolution,
they think about, the cliche
is like survival of the fittest
or nature, red in tooth and claw.
And Darwin noticed that
there were phenomena
that couldn't be explained
by this so-called survival selection,
things like the brilliant
plumage of peacocks,
sex differences, like in,
you know, stags, for example,
have these massive antlers
and the females of the species do not.
And so he came up with the
theory of sexual selection,
which deals not with the
evolution of characteristics
due to their survival advantage,
but rather due to their mating advantage.
And he identified two causal processes
by which mating advantage could occur.
One is intrasexual competition
with the stereotyping,
two stags locking horns in combat
with the victor gaining
sexual access to the female,
loser ambling off with a broken antler
and dejected in low self-esteem
and needing psychotherapy perhaps,
or mate value improvement therapy.
And the logic was whatever qualities
led to success in these same-sex battles,
those qualities get passed
on in greater numbers.
And so you see evolution,
which is change over time
and increase in frequency
of the characteristics
associated with winning these,
what Darwin called contest competition.
And we know that the logic
of that is more general now
and involves things like in our species
competing for position
in status hierarchies.
So anyway, so intrasexual
competition is one,
but the second most
relevant to your question
about mate choice is
preferential mate choice,
that was the second causal pathway.
And the logic there is that
if members of one sex
agree with one another,
if there's some consensus
about the qualities that are desired,
then those of the opposite sex
who possess the desired qualities
or embody those desired qualities,
they have a mating advantage.
They get chosen, they get preferred.
Those lacking desired
qualities get banished,
shunned, ignored,
or in the modern
environment become incels.
And so the logic there is very simple,
but also very powerful.
And that is that whatever
qualities are desired,
consensually desired,
if there's some heritable basis to those,
then those increase in
frequency over time.
And so, and in the human case,
these two causal processes
of sexual selection
are related to each other,
in that the preferences, the
mate preferences of one sex
basically set the ground
rules for competition
in the opposite sex.
So if, for example,
hypothetically women
preferred to mate with men
who were able and willing
to devote resources to them,
then that would create
competition among men
to claw their way, you know,
and beat out other men
in resource acquisition,
and then displaying that their willingness
to commit that to a particular woman.
And same with women though.
One of the interesting things about humans
is that we have mutual mate choice,
which is not true in all species.
And that is that it's not
just a matter of, you know,
you selecting someone to be your mate,
they have to reciprocally select you.
And so with mutual mate choice,
we have both preferences,
mate preferences,
that women have, and mate
preferences that men have,
and consequently competition among men
for access to the most desirable women
in competition among women for access
to the most desirable man.
So that's sort of a little
bit of theoretical backdrop.
So you asked, well,
what are the qualities
that men and women desire,
and maybe we'll start
with long-term mating,
and then shift to short-term mating.
And long-term mating is interesting
in and of itself in that it's very rare
in the mammalian world.
So there are more than 5,000
species of primates of which,
I'm sorry, more than
5,000 species of mammals,
of which we are one,
but the percentage of mammals
that have anything resembling
like a pair bond of
long-term mating strategy,
it's about 3-5%.
It's extremely rare.
And even our closest primate
relatives, the chimpanzees,
they don't have a
long-term mating strategy.
They don't have anything
resembling pair bond in mating.
In chimps, the females come into estrus,
almost all the sexual activity occurs
during the estrous phase.
After that, males and females
basically ignore each
other for the most part,
with some exceptions.
But with humans,
you have the evolution of
long-term pair bonding,
attachment, a heavy male
investment in offspring,
relatively concealed by ovulation.
And so these are kind of unique aspects
of the human mating system.
So to get to your question,
so what are the qualities?
So the best, the most large scale study
that's been done on this,
is a study that I did a while back
of 37 different cultures.
And it's now been replicated
by other researchers,
but basically what we found
is three clusters of things.
We found qualities that
both men and women wanted
in a long-term mate.
We found some qualities that
were sex differentiated,
where women prefer them more than men
or men prefer them more than women.
And then we found some attributes
that were highly variable across cultures
in whether people found these
as desirable or indispensable
or irrelevant, in a mate.
And so I could give
examples of each of these.
- Yeah, that would be great.
I'd love to know what some
of the common themes were
across these cultures
in terms of what's being
mate and sexually select for.
- Yeah, so some of the things that were,
so we talk about universal desires,
so things that men and women share.
There are things like
intelligence, kindness,
mutual attraction and love,
which is really kind of heartwarming
because some people think that love
is a recent western invention
by some European poets,
but it turns out it's not true.
You can go to the Kung San in Botswana,
and they describe pretty
much the same experience
as a falling in love as we do.
And even describe the distinction
between this kind of
infatuation stage of love
and the attachment phase where,
you can't maintain this frenzy
of infatuation and
obsession for very long,
six weeks, maybe six months at most,
otherwise you can get nothing
else done in your life.
Those are those dopamine circuits
firing at high frequency.
- Yeah, so mutual attraction, love,
good health, dependability,
emotional stability,
although there's a bit
of a sex difference there
with women preferring
it a bit more than men.
And so basically, and
these may seem obvious.
So no one wants a stupid, mean,
ugly, disease-ridden mate.
And so perhaps obvious, but,
but no one knew this in advance
of the 37 culture study.
So these were some universal preferences.
So you go to the Zulu tribe
in South Africa or, you know,
Rio de Janeiro in Brazil or
Portugal or Oslo,
or anywhere in the world,
and these are qualities that
people universally desire
in long-term mates.
Sex differences.
So sex differences basically
fell into two clusters.
So women more than men
prioritized good earning capacity,
slightly older age,
and the qualities associated
with resource acquisition.
So these are things like
a man's social status.
Does he have drive? Is he ambitious?
Does he have a good
long-term resource trajectory
is one way that I like to phrase it,
because women often they
don't look at necessarily
the resources that a guy
possesses at this moment,
but what is his trajectory?
- Just sorry to interrupt, but may I ask,
is there anything known
about the commonalities
of how that is assessed?
You know, is it, you know,
he's rolling out of bed
early in running eight miles,
he's showing proficiency in school,
he handles himself well
socially at parties,
isn't drinking too much, but knows when,
obviously they're
integrating multiple cues,
the brain is a complex place,
but is there any information
about what those variables
are across cultures?
- Yeah, well I think that
there's been less attention to that,
so that's a great question.
One of the things that we
do know across cultures
is that women attend to
the attention structure.
So the attention structure
is a key determine of status.
So the people who are high in status
are those to whom the most
people pay the most attention.
- So the attention of others to them,
not how well a given potential mate
can focus and pay attention, necessarily.
- Yeah, exactly.
And, but women look, I mean, you know,
is the guy, even in
the modern environment,
the guy spending eight hours
a day playing video games,
eating Cheetos and drinking beer,
or is he devoting effort to
his professional development?
So hard work, ambition.
Does he have clear goals or
is he in an existential crisis
not knowing what he's
going to do with his life?
So those are some of the
qualities that people look for.
And also women use
what's called in the
literature, mate choice copying.
And this is related in part
to the attention structure,
that is, guys who have
passed the filters of multiple women.
Those are like, pre-approved men.
So we've done studies
where you just take a guy,
photograph him alone
versus, take the same guy,
put an attractive woman next to him,
or put two women next to him,
and women judge exactly the same guy
to be much more attractive,
if he's paired with women,
then if he's not.
And some guys exploit
this in the modern world
by hiring wing women to go with
them on dates and so forth,
this is my sister or a former
girlfriend or whatever.
So,
but you're correct in,
in that women use multiple
cues to assess these things,
and they change over time. You know, so,
in the modern environment,
even when things like
the attention structure,
does this guy have a
million Twitter followers
or three Twitter followers.
So that is an index of
the attention structure
and hence the status of the guy
within the broader community.
So, and from an evolutionary perspective,
it's reasonable that women
would prioritize these qualities
because of the tremendous asymmetry
in our reproductive biology,
namely that fertilization
occurs internally within women,
not within men,
women bear the burdens of
the nine month pregnancy,
which is metabolically expensive,
as well as creating opportunity costs
in terms of mobility and,
and solving other tasks
that people need to solve
in the course of their lives.
And so one way to phrase
that is that the costs
of making a bad mate choice
are much heavier for women
when it comes to sexual
behavior certainly,
because, and the benefits correspondingly
of making a wise mate choice
are higher for women
in the sexual context.
But as I said, we have mutual
mate choice in our species.
And so what do men value more than women?
Physical attractiveness.
- They ranked that as a
more important criteria
than do women about men?
- Yes, exactly.
- Consistently across cultures?
- Consistently, and it's not that women
are indifferent to it.
So women do pay attention to
a guy's physical appearance,
his fitness and so forth,
and guys are actually off base
in thinking that women
prefer more muscular men
than they actually do.
So like in muscle magazines,
these men with bulging
biceps and so forth,
women don't find that especially,
but they do prioritize fit men,
a good shoulder to hip ratio
and other qualities of
physical appearance,
as well as things like cues to health.
So physical appearance provides
a wealth of information
about a person's health status,
but also provides for men
a wealth of information
about a woman's fertility,
her reproductive value.
Now not that men think
about that consciously.
I mean, men don't walk down the street
and see a woman and say,
oh, I find her attractive
because I think she must be very fertile.
Maybe a few weird people do that,
but most men just it's like,
they just find those cues attractive.
And the cues are cues
associated with youth and health
because we know that youth
is a very powerful cue
to fertility and reproductive value.
So men prioritize physical appearance,
and in the field of psychology,
I was taught when I was an undergraduate
that you can't judge a book by its cover,
that physical attractiveness
was infinitely arbitrary,
infinitely culturally variable.
And it's simply not true.
We know now based on the last 20 years
of scientific studies,
that the cues that men
find attractive women
are not at all arbitrary.
There is some variation across cultures,
like in relative
plumpness versus thinness,
but things like clear skin,
clear eyes, symmetrical features,
a low waist to hip ratio,
full lips, lustrous hair,
all these are qualities that
are associated with youth
and health, and hence have heavy evolved
to be part of our standards
of attractiveness.
And so, it's not just that men
are these superficial creatures
who evaluate women on
the basis of appearance,
there is an underlying
logic to why they do so.
And as I said, relative youth,
this age thing is one of
the largest sex differences
that you find in long-term mate selection,
with women preferring somewhat older men,
and men preferring somewhat younger women.
Is there a consistent age gap
to relate to that statement?
- Yes, there is.
So the age gap though depends
on the age of the man.
So, we can document this,
so in my studies,
what we found is that men preferred women
who were about three to four years
younger than they were on average.
And I'll qualify this in a second.
Women preferred guys who were about
three and a half to four
and a half years older
than they were.
So there was a sex difference
going in the opposite direction.
But as men get older,
they prefer women who are
increasingly younger than they are.
So one way to gauge this,
so there are actual marriage statistics,
and then there are expressed preferences,
and both sexes kind of converge.
So if you look at, you
know, first marriage,
second marriage, third marriage,
if people get divorced and remarried.
Average age gap is, in America anyway,
is three years at first marriage
with the guys being older,
five years at second marriage,
and eight years at third marriage.
So that is, as men are getting older
and getting divorced and remarried,
they are marrying women
who are increasingly
younger than they are.
In terms of preferences,
it's also expressed in preferences.
So it doesn't go down, so like a,
say a 25-year-old man would say,
prefer a woman who's
20 or in her early 20s,
35-year-old man might prefer a woman
who's in her late 20s or early 30s.
A 50-year-old man might prefer a woman
who is say, 35 to 38.
So the preferences do go up,
but the gap gets increasingly larger.
And the reason that you
don't see things like,
why aren't men preferring women?
So peak fertility in humans
is around age 24, 25.
And so you say, well,
why aren't the 60-year-old men
prioritizing 25-year-old women?
Well, as I mentioned,
it's a reciprocal mutual
mate choice phenomenon.
- She constraints the equation.
- Well, she constrains it,
but also a marriage and long-term mating
are things other than reproductive unions
in the modern environment.
That is they're,
you know, you're supposed
to do things as a couple.
And if you get too large an age gap,
then essentially you're
in different cultures.
You grow up with different songs,
and if the cultural gap gets too large,
you don't understand each other.
So, there are constraints on that,
but if you look at contexts
where there are no
constraints of that sort,
so historically kings,
emperors, despots, et cetera,
and I'll give one more modern example,
they basically prefer young,
fertile, attractive females.
And if they have harems,
they stock the harems with those,
and then circulate them out
when they're 30, and so forth.
And so if you look at marriage systems
that are unconstrained,
the preferences are more
likely to be revealed,
or within cultures.
That is, if you look at men
who were in a position
to get what they want.
So as Mick Jagger noted,
you can't always get what you want,
but if you try sometimes,
you get what you need.
- I hear that most of the
time he got what he needed,
- He got what he wanted,
and maybe what he needed,
but he was in a position.
I don't know if he still is,
he's in his seventies now,
but he was in a position
as was, let's say,
Rod Stewart, to take another
example, or Leonardo DiCaprio.
If you were a male who's in a position
where there are thousands of women
potentially available to you,
and you can have your pick,
then you see that clearer
expression for younger females.
There was a chart that was
floating around the internet
of the girlfriends of Leonardo
DiCaprio as he got older.
And as he's getting older and older,
and the graph of the
age of his girlfriends,
it basically stayed the same,
it was in the early twenties or so.
- He values consistency.
- Consistency.
But, so anyway, the data converge on that.
So these are universal sex differences
in long-term mate selection.
So now when we shift to,
and I should mention cultural variability,
because that's a critical thing,
because there is in my 37 culture study,
what I found was the
preference for virginity,
that is no prior sexual experience,
that was the most variable
desire across cultures.
So you had cultures, like at
the time of the study, China,
it was basically indispensable
that a partner be a virgin.
And then at the other end,
you have Sweden where
Swedes typically place
close to zero value on it,
and some even find it undesirable.
Like, you're weird if you're a virgin.
And so you have this whole spectrum.
- This is virginity in the
female, or is this also,
in China was it preference
that the male and the female be virgins?
It's a mutual mate a selection?
- Yeah, it was a
preference for both sexes.
- Interesting.
- But it's a good question,
because where there was a sex difference,
it was always in the direction
of males preferring
virginity more than females,
and we've gone back to China.
So I still do research in
China among other places.
And we've gone back and retested
modern urban populations,
and the importance of virginity
has gone down in China,
especially in the urban areas,
and the sex difference
that didn't exist before,
has now emerged, where males
value it more than females.
And I think part of it
was in previous times,
you hit ceiling effects, you
know, where both sexes say,
yeah, it's absolutely
important to be a Virgin.
So, there's cultural variation
and cultural change over time
in some of these qualities.
But the sex differences that I described
have remained invariant over the years.
So since my 37 culture study,
this has been replicated in,
at least a couple of
dozen different cultures,
and we've gone back to
some of the cultures.
So I mentioned, we've gone back
to China, Brazil, and India,
to look at cultural changes over time,
and there have been,
you know, in some cases,
dramatic cultural changes over time.
But the sex differences that
I described are invariant.
They haven't changed a bit.
- I'd be remiss if I didn't ask
about truth telling and deception,
because some of the measures
that you're describing,
age, for instance, one can
potentially lie about, right?
I'm guessing that there are people
who do that on online
profiles and whatnot.
From what I understand,
people also lie about
height and other features
on online profiles,
but some of them are much
harder to hide, right?
Eventually the truth comes out about some,
if not all of these things.
So, if you would,
could you tell us about how men and women
leverage deception versus truth telling
and communicating some of the things
around mate choice selection?
- Yeah, well,
so basically both men
and women do deceive,
so we have the modern cultural
invention of online dating,
which, you know,
was little-used 10 years ago,
and virtually absent 20 years ago.
And people do lie, but they
lie in predictable ways.
They lie in ways that attempt to embody
the mate preferences of the person
they're trying to attract.
And so men do lie.
They deceive about their
income, their status.
So they exaggerate their
income by about 20%.
They tack on about two
inches to their height.
So if they're five ten,
they round up to six feet.
So they don't like, if they're five ten,
they don't say that they're gigantic,
but they kind of round it up
in the more desirable direction.
Women tend to deceive about weight.
So they tend to shave about 15 pounds
off of their reported weight,
and both sexes post photos that
are not truly representative
of what they actually look like.
So they might post photos
of themselves when they were
younger, or they're even advice,
tips on how to create the best
selfie, of the best angle,
that will maximally, you know,
enhance what you look like.
- Or just doctoring of
photos I'm guessing.
- Oh yeah, Photoshopping, absolutely.
And one of the things about
it now, you say, well,
do people find out, of
course, people do find out.
I'll just give you one story
about a colleague of mine,
who is a male, who's
doing internet dating.
And he picked only women
who self-described as sevens
on the one to seven on attractiveness.
So the most attractive, as self-reported,
and se he went out with this one woman,
and she was missing her front teeth.
And he said, well, call me picky,
but missing her front teeth.
And she thinks she's like
the top of attractiveness,
he was a little disappointed about that.
And women of course are disappointed,
they meet a guy who they
think is this physically fit,
you know, athletic guy,
and he comes up he's, you know,
300 pounds and overweight.
So people do find out.
And there are some
internet dating sites have
kind of a vetting of the
accuracy of something.
So some things you can look
up through public records,
and does this guy have a
criminal record, for example,
is he on a, you know, a
sexual offenders website?
So there's some things you can verify.
But what I tell people is,
you really have to meet the
person and interact, you know,
because in part because of the deception,
but also because what
happens with internet dating
is that the photograph tends to overwhelm
all the other cues and all the other cues
are written statements.
And we weren't really evolved
to process written statements,
but we were evolved to
respond to physical cues, but,
and men tend to attend to the visual cues
much more than women.
So women in their mate selection,
they have olfactory cues to
what does the guy sound like?
His vocal qualities,
that's auditory cues,
but olfactory cues,
what does he smell like?
And so women have a more acute
sense of smell than men do.
And so if the guy doesn't smell right,
even if he embodies all these
other qualities women want,
that's a deal breaker.
And so I encourage people just, you know,
stop with a hundred texts
back and forth or messaging,
and meet a person for a
cup of coffee and interact.
And then you'll, you know,
you'll get a more accurate
bead on the person.
And then of course, some
qualities you can't assess
even with a half-hour
interaction, you can tell a lot,
but things like emotional stability,
or things that have to
be assessed over time.
And so one of the things
that I advise people to do,
and I'm not in the advice-giving business,
but people ask me all the time.
If they find out what I
study, they say, well,
I got this problem,
can you give me advice?
But one of the things to assess,
things like emotional stability,
which is absolutely critical
in long-term mating,
is to do something like
go on a trip together,
take a vacation where you're
even in an unfamiliar environment where
you have to cope with things
that you're not familiar with.
And as opposed to an environment
where it's very predictable,
and so you get a greater exposure,
because one of the hallmarks
of emotional instability
is how they respond to stress.
So emotionally unstable people
tend to have a long latency
to return to baseline
after a stressful event.
And so this is the sort of information
you can't get on a coffee date,
you can only get by
assessing it over time.
- Somebody whose laboratory studies stress
and tools to combat stress.
That's great, it's yet
more incentive for people
to develop self-regulatory
mechanisms for themselves.
I'm guessing many of the
features of deception
in this context were present
long before internet dating.
And so is it, it's somewhat
dark to think about, but is,
is deception built into this dance
that we call mate selection?
And has it been built in for a long time,
or is this something that
you think has emerged more
as people are approaching each other
through these electronic,
web-based mediums?
- I mean, some forms of
deception have been there
for a long time over human
evolutionary history.
So one form of deception,
which we haven't mentioned is deception
about whether you're interested
in a long-term committed relationship
or a short-term hookup.
And so there's deception about that,
especially on the part of men.
So men who were
interested, like on Tinder,
it has been reported,
although Tinder denies this,
there's been reported that something like
30% of the men on Tinder,
are either married or in
long-term committed relationships,
and they're looking for
something on the side, but
in terms of successfully
attracting a mate,
the overt display that,
hey I'm interested in
just a short-term hookup.
I'm interested in sex, so I
want to have sex right now.
Let's just go back to my apartment.
These are very ineffective tactics.
And so effective tactics for
men are often displaying cues
to long-term interests.
And so, and of course
that's effective for a woman
who's seeking a long-term interest.
And so, that's a deception.
So we find in our studies of deception,
that men tend to exaggerate
the depths of their feelings for a woman,
exaggerate how similar they are,
and how aligned they are in their values
and religious orientations
and political values and so forth.
And so, I think there's
deception around that,
and I think that's
probably an evolutionarily
recurrent form of deception
that women have defenses
against by the way.
But I think that modern internet dating
opens the door for certain
types of deception,
that were at a minimum,
more difficult to accomplish ancestrally.
So like things like
Photoshopping, you know,
wasn't available back then.
plus we evolved in the
context of small group living,
where you not only had
your own personal observations
of someone's qualities,
you had also your relatives, your friends,
allies, the social
reputation that someone had.
And these are all critical
sources of information
that are less available
in modern environments
because, you know, people migrate,
they move from place to place.
They can close down one internet
profile and put up another,
or that could have six
going simultaneously.
So the modern environment
opens up the door
for forms of deception
that weren't available
or weren't available to the
same degree, ancestrally.
- I see.
Very interesting.
Would you mind touching
on some of the features
that are selected for,
in terms of sexual partner choice?
We talked a little bit about mate choice,
but in terms of sexual partner choice,
are there any good studies exploring
what people are selecting for,
or is it that they are
both just in a state
of pure hypothalamic drive?
I'm a neuroscientist, after all.
And therefore it's hard to
recreate in the laboratory.
- Well, no, no.
We do know something about that,
and we know something
about how the preferences
for a sex partner differ
from preference for a long-term mate.
There is overlap of course,
but one thing is physical appearance.
So physical appearance for women
is important in long-term mating,
not as important as it is for men,
but it becomes more important
in short-term mating.
And so it is the guy good-looking?
So those physical attributes
are more important for women.
They are, they remain important for men,
physical appearance in short-term mating,
but with the footnote that men are willing
to drop their standards
in short-term mating,
if it's low commitment,
low risk, just sex,
without entangling commitments.
Women are more likely to prioritize
what I call bad boy qualities.
So guys who are very self-confident,
guys who are strut, guys
who are a little arrogant,
guys who are risk-taking,
guys who defy conventions,
women are more attracted to those guys
in short-term mating
than long-term mating.
And whereas in long-term mating,
they go more for the good dad qualities.
Is this guy dependable?
Is he going to be a good
father to my children?
And then also in short-term mating
women use that mate-copying a heuristic.
That is, if there are
thousands of other women
who find him attractive,
women find him attractive.
And so that's why you have
the groupie phenomenon.
So, with the rock stars, for example,
there are thousands of screaming women,
all of whom want to sleep
with this famous rock star.
And they use that as
information they find,
if you took like a still photo
of some of these rock stars
and asked women how attractive the guy is,
versus tell 'em he's a famous rock star
and showed the thousands
of women screaming at him,
that they judge him entirely differently,
in terms of his attractiveness.
So even, and this is an important point
that women's attraction to
men is more context specific,
and varies more across contexts,
than men's attraction to women.
And so I'll give you
just an example of that.
This is a female colleague
of mine went to a conference,
an academic conference,
and she found the organizer
of this conference
to be really attractive,
and then saw him six
months later and wondered,
well, what was I thinking?
He doesn't seem very attractive at all.
And what it was is when
he was the organizer,
he was at the center of
the attention structure.
You know, he was the guy up
on stage directing everybody
and everyone was attending to him.
And then when he was
just a normal presenter
at a conference,
he didn't command the attention structure
like he did when he was the organizer.
And so this is just an illustration of how
circumstance-dependent women's
mate attraction is for guys.
It depends on, you know, his status,
the number of women that
are attracted to him,
the attention structure,
how he interacts with a puppy, or a baby.
If he's ignoring a baby in distress
or positively interacting
with a young child.
All these things, whereas for
men, it almost doesn't matter.
Context is more irrelevant.
They're honing in on the
specific psychophysical cues
that the woman is displaying,
and context be damned.
- Very interesting.
Let's talk about infidelity
in committed relationships.
What are some of the consistent
findings around reasons for,
and maybe even long-term
consequences of infidelity
for men and women, and
this could be marriage,
or long-term partnership, or, you know,
infidelity of any kind, I suppose.
I'm guessing it does happen.
How frequent is it?
- Yeah, that's the interesting thing.
Well, how frequent it is,
is difficult to gauge because,
it's one of the forms of human conduct
that people like to keep secret.
So, if you go back now say 70 years
to the classic Kinsey studies,
the questions about infidelity
were the questions that most
people refused to answer.
And when the question was brought up,
caused more people to
drop out of the study.
And so that kind of tells
you something that, I mean,
what do people conceal?
You know, infidelity, incest, murder,
there is a small handful of things
that people universally want to conceal,
and infidelity is one of them.
So, but people do it.
And so Kinsey estimated
26% of married women
committed an infidelity at some
point during their marriage,
and about 50% of men.
Other studies have given lower figures.
And so the exact figures
bounce around, depending on,
you know, anonymity provided
and how comfortable they are
with the interviewer and so forth.
- And by infidelity,
does that mean intercourse
with somebody else?
So we're not talking about quote
unquote, emotional affairs.
We're talking about just sex with somebody
other than their committed partner
unbeknownst to their partner.
- Right, right.
And there are other forms of infidelity,
which we could get into,
including emotional infidelity
and financial infidelity.
But here, we're just talking about,
for the moment, sexual infidelity.
And the interesting thing
about sexual infidelity
is that the sexes really
differ fundamentally
in the motives for committing infidelity.
So for men, the primary motive,
and these are on average sex differences.
So whenever I talk about sex differences,
I'm talking about on
average sex differences,
cause there's overlap
in the distributions.
So these are generalizations
of which there are exceptions.
So for men, it's mainly a
matter of sexual variety.
So about 70% of the men,
it's the opportunity presented itself,
I was out of town and
I had this opportunity.
So low risk, low cost
pursuit of sexual variety,
sexual novelty, is a
key motivation for men.
- Sorry to interrupt.
So 70% of men that cheat
that's the primary cause,
or is it that 70% of men do cheat?
- No, no, no.
Of the men who cheat, 70%,
thank you for that clarification,
of the men who do cheat 70%
cite that as the key motive,
the key reason why they
committed an infidelity.
- Sort of like why mountain
climbers climb mountains,
because they're there?
- Right, right.
Because they're there,
the comedian, I think
it was Chris Rock said,
men are only as faithful
as their opportunity.
- Or how available their
password on their phone is
to their partner.
- Right, right.
So, but, and that's an exaggeration,
but if you look at women, this
just desire for pure novelty,
sexual variety, is much less of a motive,
but women who have affairs
cite that they're unhappy with
their primary relationship,
emotionally unhappy, or sexually unhappy,
and typically both.
And this may seem like
totally obvious that,
well, of course,
people if they're
unhappy in a relationship
are more likely to stray,
but in fact, it's not true for men.
So if you compare men who are
happy with their marriage,
and men who are not happy
with their marriage,
there's no difference in
their infidelity rates.
And I think it goes down
to that issue of, you know,
motive for seeking variety.
So now why do women do it?
Because it's a risky endeavor.
She risks her long-term mate
or losing her long-term mate.
It's risky in terms of
reputational damage for both sexes.
So it's a risky thing.
Why do women do it?
And there are two competing
hypotheses, at least two,
but there are two primary
competing hypotheses
in the evolutionary literature.
One is called the dual
mating strategy hypothesis,
where women are seeking to
get resources and investment
from one guy and good
genes from another guy.
And in principle that can work.
And I initially this wasn't a
hypothesis original with me.
This is, Steve Gangestad, Randy Thornhill,
and some others, Marty Hazelton,
a former student of mine,
have advocated this dual
mating strategy hypothesis.
And originally I was endorsed it,
because the data seemed to support it,
and we can get into which
data seemed to support it.
But over time I became
more and more dubious
about this hypothesis,
and instead have advocated
what I call the mate switching hypothesis.
And so if you look at a
whole host of information
around why women have affairs,
it's not compatible
with the dual mating strategy hypothesis.
So, and is compatible
with the mate switching,
that is, women who are looking to either
divest themselves from
an existing mateship,
or trade up in the mating market to a mate
who's more compatible with
them or higher in mate value,
or simply see whether they're
sufficiently desirable,
so that it eases the transition
into the mating pool,
or keeping a mate made as
a potential backup mate,
what I call mate insurance.
You have car insurance if
something bad happens to your car,
house insurance,
we also have mate insurance, you know.
One women said, men are like soup,
you always want to have
one on the back burner.
So, whether that's the
best analogy or not,
I'm not sure, but it kind
of captures something,
about why so, well, what
evidence am I talking about?
Well, for one thing,
women who have affairs,
and this is about 70% of them.
- Again, sorry, just, I want to make sure.
Of women who have affairs.
- So let's say, ballpark,
Kinsey was, let's say roughly right,
25-26% of women will have affairs.
Let's just assume that he's right.
And we don't know exactly,
but of the women who do have affairs,
about 70% say they have fallen in love
with their affair partner.
They become deeply emotionally involved
And to me,
if you're just trying to
get good genes from a guy,
that is the last thing you want to do
is fall in love with them
or get emotionally involved,
but it's very compatible if
you want to switch mates.
And so that's sort of,
that's one piece of evidence
that suggests that women,
the mate switching function of infidelity
is a more likely explanation.
Now, these two are not inherently
incompatible hypotheses.
In other words,
it's possible that some women
do pursue a dual mating
strategy hypothesis,
but there's other evidence that suggests,
so for example,
what are the actual rates
of genetic cuckoldry?
Well in the modern environment
anyway, they're pretty low.
It turns out they're like 2-3%.
- Could you just explain for the audience
what genetic cuckoldry is?
- So this is where the woman,
where the man believes he is
the genetic father of a child,
but it turns out he's not,
might be the mailman or
the next door neighbor
or the guy she's having an affair with.
So mistaken paternity
and genetic cuckoldry is
just one way to capture it.
- Named after the cuckoo bird, right?
- Named after the cuckoo bird, yeah.
- Who sneaks its eggs into
the nest of the other,
destroys the future offspring of the bird,
and then basically offloads
all the work onto another.
- Right.
- Father.
- Parasitizes, yeah
the parental investment
of different bird species.
So anyway,
so I think that,
and there's other sources of
evidence that I think points,
so one of the sources of evidence
that initially seemed to support
the dual mating strategy
hypothesis was ovulation shifts.
So in other words,
it looked like from the early studies
that when women are ovulating,
these are among non-pill-taking women,
women not on hormonal contraceptives,
that they experienced a preference shift
toward more men who were
masculine and symmetrical,
which were hypothesized
markers for good genes.
And there's an explanation for that,
but it turns out the effects of ovulation
on women's mate preferences are far weaker
than the initial studies looked like.
And in fact,
some larger scale studies
have failed to replicate them entirely.
And so that was one of the
key sources of evidence.
These ovulation shifts
that women were going after the genes,
because it's only when she's ovulating,
and she can get pregnant by
having sex with another man
that it would make sense for her
to have sex with another man.
And there was even some early evidence
that women were timing their affairs,
timing sex with their affair partners
to coincide with when they were ovulating.
But, as I said,
some of these subsequent studies
have failed to replicate
these early findings,
calling into question the
dual mating strategy notion.
And so I've shifted my views on this,
and now endorse the mate
switching hypothesis
as a more likely explanation
for why most women have affairs.
- The way you describe
this makes me wonder if,
of the women that have affairs,
do those affairs tend
to be more long lasting
than the affairs that men have,
because the way you describe it,
as men are seizing an opportunity
to sort of a carpe diem
type approach to infidelity,
and women potentially on average,
are capitalizing on something
that is longer term.
Now, of course, if they're
doing this around ovulation,
then it would constrain
the amount of times
they would need to see or have sex with
this other person that
they're not married to.
But is there any evidence
that women have more ongoing affairs
and men have more transient affairs?
- Yeah, there is.
And so if you look at
people who have affairs,
there's a sex difference there.
So that women tend to have
affairs with one person,
and become emotionally involved
with that one person over time.
Men who have affairs tend to have affairs
with a larger number of affair partners.
And so, which then by definition,
can't be long lasting.
You can't have long-term affairs
with six different partners.
- Unless he's juggling multiple
phone accounts or something.
- Right, right.
And some men try to do that,
but I think it could be very taxing.
- Yeah, and in this day and age,
it's easier to meet more people
by virtue of online communications,
but it's also easier to get caught,
meaning it's harder to
conceal interactions.
Everything's in the cloud anyway.
A good friend of mine
who is former very high
level in special operations,
said anything that's not in
your head and only in your head
is available for others to
find, should they want it,
and I think that's largely true.
- Yeah so,
phone information, text messages,
and people are very good
at hacking into their
partners' phones, computers.
And then also there are
video cameras everywhere.
So sneaking off to this
quiet restaurant, I mean,
there are probably eight video cameras
that can record you walking
in and out of that restaurant.
- Everything can be found.
I'm certain of that.
You mentioned emotional affairs
and financial infidelity, as well.
I had a girlfriend once who,
as a early date discussion said,
not that I get the
impression that you are,
but I want to be very clear.
She said, that you are not emotionally,
physically or financially
tied to any other women.
And I thought it was very interesting
that now you bring up
financial infidelity.
She's quite happily partnered
now and not with me, but,
but it's interesting, it's the first time
I heard anyone spell it
out that way as a list,
almost like specific aims in a grant.
What is emotional infidelity?
What is financial infidelity?
- Yeah, yeah.
Well, this is a very smart woman,
she tapped into all three.
So, and I assumed you
gave honest responses
to all of those three questions.
- As I recall I did, but as we now know,
you can ask her at some point.
- Right, right.
- And there is self deception
in the service of deception
that is another issue.
So emotional infidelity is basically
exactly what it sounds like.
It's falling in love with someone else,
becoming psychologically
close to someone else,
sharing intimate or private
information with someone else.
That's what I mean by
emotional infidelity.
And one of the hallmarks of this
is a study done by a
former student of mine,
Barry Cooley, it was
very clever I thought.
He analyzed, there used to be
this reality TV show called Cheaters,
where they would hire detectives,
and they would, when the
detective would like,
say follow someone to a hotel room,
they'd call up the partner and say,
your husband just walked
into the hotel room
with someone else.
Would you like to come down
to the hotel and confront him?
And a certain percentage
of people would confront,
and what he analyzed,
so he analyzed all these episodes
of this show called Cheaters.
And what he examined was
the verbal interrogations
when people confronted their partners.
And when men confronted their partners,
the first question they want to know is,
did you fuck him?
Women, their first question
was, do you love her?
And so this kind of
captures that difference
between sexual infidelity
and emotional infidelity,
and also kind of captures
another sex difference
when it comes to sexual
jealousy, you know,
where men tend to be more focused
on the sexual components
of the infidelity,
because those are what compromise
his paternity certainty,
his certainty that he's
actually the genetic father
of whatever offspring ensue,
whereas love is a cue to, do you love her?
That's a cue that he's going
to leave you, the woman,
for another woman,
as a cue that,
to the long-term loss of that investment
and commitment from that partner.
And so the sexes seem to differ
in which aspects of the infidelity,
with women were attuned
to or more upset by
the emotional infidelity,
men, more by the sexual infidelity.
Now, financial infidelity
has been explored much less,
but in my new book, When Men Behave Badly,
I have a section on financial infidelity,
where I summarize all the
research that has been done.
And I was kind of flabbergasted
by the percentage of people
who do things like have credit cards
that their spouse doesn't know about,
keep secret bank accounts,
have the credit card bills
mailed to their office
rather than their home,
have basically resources and expenditures
of pooled resources that
they keep from their partner,
and both sexes do it.
And the percentages vary
from study to study,
but they range from like
30 to 60% of all people
who are keeping financial information
from their spouse in one way or another.
It could be the woman's
out buying designer purses,
or designer handbags.
It could be the guys
out going to strip clubs
or taking his affair
partner to restaurants,
and doesn't want those charges
to show up on, you know,
a jointly held credit card.
So financial infidelity is critical.
And then even things like
diverting pooled resources
to one set of genetic
relatives versus another set
is another thing that
people tend to keep secret.
So there are forms of
financial infidelity, as well.
So, yeah, infidelity, you're absolutely,
it's a great question,
because it shouldn't be
confined to sexual infidelity,
which is what most people think about,
but also emotional and financial.
Interestingly, if you ask people,
what is infidelity in a marriage?
Men tend to say, well, it's obvious
as she has sex with someone
else, that's infidelity.
Whereas women are more likely
to have a broader
definition of infidelity.
They will cite things
like emotional infidelity,
financial infidelity, as
part of the definition.
Whereas men have that
more narrow definition.
- Interesting.
I have a good friend
who's a couples counselor,
a clinical psychologist,
and she told me something
interesting that relates to this,
which is that in cases of infidelity,
oftentimes some of the
arguments between couples
boil down to whether or not
contraception was used or not.
That becomes a key feature,
and she always thought
that that was, you know,
homing in on a detail,
which of course is an important detail
as it relates to both
paternity issues and pregnancy,
but also disease, right.
But as we're talking about all this,
it makes me think that
this may have deeper
evolutionary roots in our,
further down in the brain,
as we say in neuroscience literature.
- And yeah,
using a condom versus not using a condom,
not using is a more intimate act in a way,
you were literally
physically more intimate
with someone else,
than if you do use a condom.
But whether evolutionary roots to this,
I don't know, I mean condoms
are probably relatively recent,
or at least the widespread use of them
are relatively recent
in evolutionary time.
So I doubt we have adaptation
specifically for them.
- No, and presumably before condoms,
that one can only speculate
because as we say,
when it comes to behavior,
there's rarely a fossil record,
but sometimes there is,
it would be the withdrawal
method of contraception,
which a good friend of mine who studies,
whose laboratory works
on reproductive biology,
says the reason that's a
poor choice of contraception
is because it was designed not to work.
So note to those trying to
avoid unwanted pregnancy.
So we talked a little bit about status
in terms of what men and
women are selecting for,
for different types of relationships.
Is there anything else about status
that you find particularly
interesting, and you know,
what men are finding attractive
besides these, you know,
waist to hip ratios and
quality of potential mothers
and so forth.
Are there any kind of a
hidden gems in the literature
around this that I
might not have heard of?
- Well, yeah.
So you mean among,
things like sex differences
in what leads to high status?
- For instance, or what,
or perhaps things that are surprising
in terms of what people are selecting for.
Do people even know what
they're selecting for?
Or is this all subconscious?
Any and all of those topics
are of interest to me.
- So we'll have to take
them in reverse order.
You know, I think a
lot of it is conscious,
but some of it is certainly unconscious,
or there are elements which
are totally unconscious.
So I mentioned one earlier
where a man looks at a woman,
he's not, he's aware that
he's attracted to her
and attracted to her physical appearance,
but he might not be aware of why.
We didn't evolve to be aware of why,
just like with food preferences,
we find certain things delectable
and other things nauseating,
we don't understand the adaptive logic
of why our food preferences
exist and why we have them.
And the same is true of mating, you know?
And so men find women with a
low waist-hip ratio attractive,
but they might not, they almost rarely,
rarely will they know, oh,
low waist ratio is actually associated
with higher fertility, lower
endocrinological problems,
lower age, et cetera.
So, we're sometimes aware of what we want,
but we are unaware of why we want it.
So, there are unconscious elements
that the whole topic of status
and what leads to high
status or low status,
it's a topic I'm currently investigating,
published a couple
scientific articles on it.
And so maybe we'll hold off on that
for a future discussion,
but it intersects, I'll mention one,
it intersects with mating
in interesting ways,
in that higher status
gives people the ability to choose
from a wider pool of potential mates
than they would if they have low status.
And so one of the reasons
that people strive for status
is because they have access
to more desirable mates.
Conversely,
having desirable mates endows
you with higher status.
And so if you have,
if you're a male,
you have a very attractive
woman on your arm
that leads to high status.
And so there's a reciprocal link
between status and mating in that way.
And there've been studies where,
say they pose a kind
of an unattractive guy,
older unattractive guy, and
a stunningly beautiful woman
as his girlfriend.
And they say, well,
what's this guy all about?
And they say, oh, he must
be very high in status.
He must be very wealthy.
He must have a lot going for him,
whereas the reverse people don't
make the same attributions.
And so there is an
interesting reciprocal link
between status and mating success,
where mating success leads to high status,
and high status leads
to more mating success.
- Over and over again,
there are these instances
that you describe
where the assessment of potential mates,
sexual or long-term partnership,
are being made in the contents
of good statistical practices,
looking at the choices of others
as a readout of your own choices.
This seems to be a theme
that this is not being made
in a very narrow context,
but paying attention to what other people
are paying attention to.
It seems to come up again and again.
Slightly off center from that,
but still paying attention to what
other people are paying attention to.
What's known about jealousy
in men versus women?
And how frequent it is, how intense it is,
and what people do with that jealousy.
I mean, we hear,
or I've heard at some point that
a large fraction of homicides
are the consequence of jealous lovers.
That's the darkest angle of all this,
but in evolutionary psychology
context, what is jealousy?
Does it relate to paternity issues only?
What can you tell us about jealousy?
Yeah, that's great set of questions,
and when I first started
studying jealousy,
I reviewed all the prior
publications on jealousy.
And at that time,
jealousy was regarded
as a sign of immaturity,
a sign of insecurity,
a sign of a neurosis or pathology,
or in some cases delusion.
And what I argued is,
and do argue, is that
jealousy is an evolved emotion
that serves several
adaptive functions, okay?
One of which you mentioned
is a paternity certainty function.
But to back up a second,
basically, once you have the evolution
of long-term mating, long-term pair bonds,
you're talking about
from a male perspective,
investing a tremendous amount
of resources in a woman
and her children over years or decades,
even with boomerang kids now,
it may go more than two decades.
- Boomerang kids?
- Kids who leave home and then
come back and live at home.
- That happens?
- Oh yeah, that happens.
- I don't have children.
- Okay yeah, no that's a big thing.
- But if I do I'll just
expect that they'll come back.
- They'll come back because
they can't find a job,
or they find it cheaper
to live at the parent's
house, or whatever.
- Oh, goodness.
I can't think of anything worse.
I mean, I love my parents.
- I know, I can't imagine,
but it happens and it's
happening more and more,
given the current economic situation.
But, so once you have long-term mating,
you need a defense
to prevent or preserve the investment
that you've made and are
making in long-term mateship.
And so jealousy serves this
mate guarding function,
if you will, or mate retention function.
So in other words, one
way of phrasing this,
is that we know that they are affairs,
we know that people break
up, they get divorced,
but people have adaptations
to want to hold on to their mates, okay?
And that's what jealousy's in part about.
And so jealousy gets activated
when there are threats
to that romantic relationship.
And there are other forms of jealousy,
like sibling jealousy and so forth,
but we're focusing on mating
jealousy in this context.
So now what's interesting
is that the threats
to an ongoing, valued
romantic relationship
come from many sources.
So they could be,
you detect cues to your
partner's infidelity,
or cues of a lack of an emotional distance
between you and your partner.
You say, I love you to your partner,
and your partner says,
I wonder how the hell the Knicks are doing
this scoring season, or whatever.
If you get an unreciprocated
I love you is a bad cue.
- Or a half, or some people
are so tuned to this,
if there's a half millisecond delay,
they can detect delays in responses.
- Yes, yeah.
Delays in responses, but even things like,
so that's one set of cues,
but then there's another set
of interested mate poachers.
So, you know, if you're mated
to someone who's desirable,
which many people are, other
people still desire them,
and so sometimes try to poach them,
or lure them away from you
for a short term sexual encounter,
or for a longer term relationship.
And so we have to be, so
jealousy motivates people
to be attentive to potential mate poachers
in their environment,
but even more subtle things
like mate value discrepancies
can trigger jealousy.
So even if there are no mate poachers
and no accused infidelity,
if a mate value discrepancy
opens up in a relationship.
So in the American system,
like you're a six or an eight or a ten,
and people generally pair off
based on similarity and mate value.
- So that tends to happen,
sixes end up with sixes,
sevens end up with
sixes, plus or minus one.
These are somewhat subjective scales.
- Somewhat subjective,
but there's still some
consensus about these things.
So even colloquially people,
colloquially people say things like,
he's not good enough for you, you know,
or I think you could do better to people
who implicitly have a notion
of relative mate value
and discrepancies therein,
but discrepancies can open up
where none previously existed.
So you get fired from a job.
All of a sudden, you know,
and most people are very understanding
and forgiving about that,
if it's not too long, but you
go six months, eight months,
people start having problems,
or if someone's career takes off.
Let's say a woman becomes
a famous singer or actress,
or a man does, career takes off.
All of a sudden there's
a mate value discrepancy
where you have access to a
larger pool of potential mates
and higher mate value potential mates.
So, people are attentive to
mate value discrepancies.
And so jealousy can get activated,
even if there are no immediate
threats to a relationship,
but the mate value discrepancy is a threat
that looms on the horizon
of the relationship,
because we know statistically
the higher mate value person
is more likely to have an
affair and is more likely
to dump the other person and
trade up in the mating market.
- And when people find new partners
for long-term relationships,
do they tend to trade up?
- On average yes,
if the discrepancy is sufficiently large,
so there are costs
associated with breaking up,
divorcing for example, I
mean, it's emotionally,
financially, it's a costly thing.
And so if you have like a half a point
mate value discrepancy,
you're not going to see a lot
of breakups, but you know,
if you have larger mate
value discrepancies,
that's going to augur more for
trading up in the mating market.
So, then you get into,
so what jealousy is,
it's an emotion that gets
activated by these circumstances.
And then what people do about it
depends on what their options are.
And people do things that I,
in my published scientific work,
I say range from vigilance to violence.
So this whole spectrum of things.
In fact, I've identified
19 different tactics
that people use to deal with
problems once they get jealous,
and one is increased vigilance,
and the other extreme violence.
- Vigilance for the behavior of the mate.
- Yeah, vigilance for
the behavior of the mate.
And that can include stalking, following,
hacking into iPhones or computers,
monitoring the behavior of mate poachers,
looking at eye contact between
other men and your partner.
There's a whole suite
of things that you know,
is involved in vigilance.
And then at the other extreme,
and we can talk about things in between,
but the other extreme is violence.
And so in my new book,
When Men Behave Badly,
I have a whole chapter on
intimate partner violence.
And this is what I argue,
and this is really unfortunate,
and I'm not endorsing it.
It's illegal, it's bad, don't do it.
But people will engage
in intimate partner violence in America,
something like 28 to 30% of
all people who are married
will experience intimate partner violence
in their relationships, so
it's not a trivial percentage.
- And that violence is
between the two partners.
- Between the two partners, yes.
There's also violence that gets directed
to our potential mate poachers,
but that's a somewhat separate issue.
But one of the things that is
functional about the violence
is that it tends to reduce
perceived mate value discrepancies.
So in other words,
guys tend to engage in the
violence more than women do,
although some argue that there's more
equality in the violence,
but at a minimum men
tend to do more damage
when they do the violence.
- And when you're talking about violence,
is this ever emotional violence?
- Yeah, there there's that as well.
And in fact, the two
tend to be correlated.
So in my studies of married couples,
verbal violence is a good predictor
of physical violence happening as well.
So one of the things that'll happen,
just to give a concrete example,
guys will start insulting
their partner's appearance.
You're really looking ugly today.
Your thighs are heavy or, you know,
you're not looking very good,
so they try to denigrate
the woman's appearance,
which is a key component
of woman's mate value.
- So they're trying to adjust more closely
the mate value discrepancy.
- Yeah, they're trying
to reduce her perceived,
self-perceived mate value.
So if, let's say he's
a six, she's an eight,
and he can convince her that
she's actually only a six,
then she's going to be more
likely to stay with him.
- Very diabolical.
- It's terribly diabolical.
But the fact is women don't
feel good about themselves
when they get beaten up by their partner.
In fact, in the cases where
it leaves physical evidence,
women wear sunglasses or
turtlenecks or cover up,
the bruises is it literally
does lower the mate value
of the woman by injuring
her physical appearance.
- And getting her to conceal
herself, stay home, et cetera.
Yeah, taking her out of the,
the literally reducing her visibility.
- Right, and that's actually
one of the predictors of violence,
is if he starts doing
things other than violence,
like cutting off her relationships
with her friends and her family,
trying to sequester her,
and prevent her from getting exposed
to potential other partners.
And so it is a very diabolical,
but I think important
to understand, you know,
the potential functionality
of intimate partner violence.
- What about, sorry to interrupt again,
but I'm just so curious.
So oftentimes my audience will
say you interrupt too often,
but I want to make sure that
I don't miss an opportunity
to ask you about the
intimate partner violence
in the other direction, female to male,
where stereotypically speaking
that the opportunity for
physical violence is still there,
but the idea in mind is that it would be
more of a psychological nature.
Although I think there is evidence
that some women beat their husbands,
but I'm guessing it's not
as frequent or am I off?
- Well, different studies,
so it depends on whether you
just simply count up acts,
or whether you look at
the damage it has done.
And, as I mentioned,
men tend to do more physical damage,
so there are shelters for battered women
all over the country.
As far as I know, there's
one for battered men.
Now it may be,
and this is partly true
that men are more ashamed
if they get beaten up by their partner,
clocked with a frying pan,
and it's possible,
and there's evidence that police
don't take it as seriously.
So there's one case
that I report in my book
where a guy called the police,
and his wife had clocked
him with something,
and police shows up and he says,
if she so much as broke a
fingernail in this altercation,
they'll charge you and not her.
And so there is a police bias,
a potential police bias in this.
And so there may be under-reporting
of women beating up men as a consequence.
But, the motivations are often different.
So one is that
male sexual jealousy will trigger
him to attack his partner,
and then she will use physical
violence to defend herself.
So she might pick up a frying pan,
or a weapon of some
sort to defend herself.
and so the motivation is his
sexual jealousy on his part,
but self-defense on her part.
And so that accounts for some
unknown percentage of the
cases, and in some cases,
it is women who were outraged
when they discover their partner's
been having sex with someone else,
an infidelity of a sexual,
financial, or emotional nature.
And so there is some
female to male violence
that absolutely occurs.
But the reduction of a
perceived mate value discrepancy
is a key function from male perspective.
Again, not that he thinks about this,
he's just angry and
wants to hurt her, okay?
Okay, but here's one other
thing that is really interesting
about the intimate partner violence,
and that's the specificity of
it depending on circumstances,
and namely, when the woman gets pregnant,
she's more vulnerable
to physical violence,
and when the man suspects
that he's not the father
of that pregnancy,
he's more likely to direct the violence
toward blows to her abdomen.
It's that specific.
And so in that case the function
is hypothesized function,
is to terminate the
pregnancy by a rival male,
as opposed to deterring the woman
from committing an infidelity,
or from leaving the relationship entirely.
So that's why one function
of intimate partner violence,
is just sequestering the woman
and keeping her all to himself.
So it's both to prevent infidelity
and to prevent defection.
- I have a friend whose
wife told me
that if he cheats I'll kill him,
that's what she said,
but it's actually just much easier
to keep him very, very busy.
And that statement now leaps to mind,
because of what you're describing,
that there are many
tactics by which people
can engage this effort to reduce
the mate value discrepancy,
not all of which are overtly violent,
but all of which are designed
to constrain their behavior.
- Right, right.
Yeah, so these would fall under
what I would call mate retention tactics,
and only one or two of which
fall under the violence category.
Yeah, they're even, yeah,
within partner psychological manipulations
about these things.
So there are psychological manipulations
about perceived mate value,
no one else would want you,
you're a loser there's
denigration of partner
within the relationship,
even feigning anger to make the partner
feel guilty about say,
looking at someone else.
So there's all kinds of
inter nesting warfare
that goes on within relationships
to manipulate perceptions of these things.
This is, I'm creating
a much too jaded view
of romance and love, I think.
- Oh no, we will get to the happy endings.
I mean, there are certainly many
happy relationships out there.
As a neuroscientist, I hear about this,
and the immediacy of
how people fall into
a pattern or jealousy,
or a pattern of cheating and, not always,
it just speaks to a brain circuitry
that's evolved to protect something.
And I'm sure this statement
is not exhaustive,
but I think it's accurate
to say that every species,
but especially humans,
wants to make more of itself
and protect its young,
but these issues of paternity
and resource allocation,
I think they're vital.
Yeah, I look forward to a day
where evolutionary
psychology and neuroscience
can merge at the level
of underlying mechanism.
But I don't think it's dark,
I think it's just the way
we're wired at some level.
Speaking of dark, could you
tell us about the dark triad?
- Yeah, so the dark triad,
so we've been talking about
sex differences on average,
but there are critical within-sex
individual differences,
and the dark triad is one
of the most important ones.
The dark triad consists
of three personality characteristics,
so narcissism, Machiavellianism,
and psychopathy.
Hallmarks of narcissism are
things like grandiosity,
the person thinks that
they're more intelligent,
more attractive, more dazzling,
more charming than they actually are.
The think they're the greatest
person since sliced bread.
Importantly, with narcissism,
you also get a sense of entitlement.
So they feel entitled to
a larger share of the pie,
whether that be the financial pie,
the status pie, or the sexual pie.
Machiavellianism is high scorers
tend to pursue an
exploitative social strategy.
So they might feign
cooperation, but then cheat,
you know, on subsequent moves.
They view other people as
pawns to be manipulated
for their own instrumental gains.
And then psychopathy, one of
the hallmarks of psychopathy
is a lack of empathy.
So most people have a
normal empathy circuit
where if a child falls down and gets hurt,
we feel compassion for the harm
that that person is undergoing.
Or if a puppy gets a hit
by a car or whatever,
we feel compassion, psychopaths don't.
That is those high on this,
it's a dimensional thing,
it's not a categorical thing.
So those high on psychopathy
basically lack empathy.
And so if you combine these qualities,
narcissism, psychopathy,
and Machiavellianism,
you have well, some very bad dudes.
And I say bad dudes
'cause men tend to score
higher on these things than women,
especially on the psychopathy dimension.
So when you talk about
clinical levels of psychopathy,
it's estimated to be
something like 1% of women
and about 4% of men.
So men are much higher on that.
So why is this important?
Well, it's important
in the mating context,
because those who are
high on dark triad traits
tend to be sexual deceivers for one.
So they're very often very charming,
very good at seducing women,
and then abandoning them sometimes with,
after fleecing them or
draining their bank account.
They're very good at the art of seduction,
they also tend to be sexual harassers,
serial sexual harassers,
and sexual coercers.
So when it comes to
forms of sexual violence,
high dark triad guys tend
to be perpetrators of this.
And so like most men I think, would be,
find it ethically abhorrent
to sexually harass a
woman in the workplace,
dark triad guys, in part maybe
they feel entitled to it,
and in part they do.
I mean, in some cases
that I report in the book,
there are like literal descriptions
where the guys are
writing in these journals,
I knew she was attracted to me.
You know, that's why she
met me in the Xerox room
just when I was there,
'cause she wanted to admire
my bulging biceps or whatever.
- It's all about them.
- Yeah, and they,
and this gets into a
bias that I talk about,
which is the male sexual
misperception bias,
where a woman smiles at a man,
man thinks, oh, she wants my body,
she's attracted to me.
And women are thinking, oh,
I'm just being friendly,
I'm being polite or professional.
But these guys high dark triad guys
are more susceptible to the
sexual over-perception bias,
and they literally believe that the woman
is attracted to them and
sending them signals,
green lights to sexually approach.
And so if you combine dark triad traits
with the dispositional pursuit
of a short-term mating strategy,
that's an especially deadly combination.
That's when you get sexual
harassment, sexual coercion.
So these are very bad dudes,
also predictors of
intimate partner violence.
- What approximate frequency
in the male population
have all three of the dark triad traits.
And I realize that they're on a continuum,
sociopathy, narcissism.
- That's why you can't say
because they are on a continuum,
and it's sort of arbitrary
where you draw the line.
But I think it's a minority of men.
It's a subset of men who
commit the vast majority
of these acts of sexual violence.
And that's why it's not like,
if you look at victims of sexual violence,
they're more numerous
than the perpetrators of sexual violence,
because the perpetrators tend to be
serial offenders, so to speak.
One guy in the workplace,
harassing 15 different women,
one guy sexually coercing,
you know, multiple women.
That's why you have like, in
well-known cases in the news,
like Harvey Weinstein, you know,
probably over a hundred different women,
Bill Cosby, Jeffrey Epstein,
some of these more famous cases,
these are a large number of victims,
but pretty much [indistinct]
the perpetrators.
And there's no question that these guys
like Harvey Weinstein and Jeffrey Epstein
were definitely high on dark triad traits.
- You mentioned stalking briefly.
Maybe we could just talk about
some of the less known
features about stalking.
I think I once heard you
give a lecture where you said
that one of the scariest
things about stalking
is that sometimes it works.
- Yes, yeah.
So, well stalking has
multiple motivations,
but one of the most frequent motivations
is a mating motivation,
where either there's a breakup
and the woman dumps the guy
and the guy doesn't want to get dumped,
he wants to maintain a
relationship with her.
And I should say that,
when it comes to criminal stalking,
there's a huge sex difference.
About 80% of the stalkers tend
to be men, about 20% women.
So there are women stalkers, but they're,
about a fourth of the
number compared to men.
So the motivation of the guys tends to be
either an attempt to get
back together with the woman,
either sexually or in a relationship or,
and/or to interfere with
her future mating prospects.
And it works in some of
the time in two senses.
One is it does interfere
with her attempts to remate.
So in fact, it scares off some guys.
So like you show up and pick
up a woman at her apartment
for a date and her ex is sitting
out there glaring at you.
- Or, I'm actually familiar
with the circumstance
where early in a relationship,
somebody mentions that an ex has made
veiled threats about
surveillance, for instance.
I've actually had that happen
several times in my dating history
where someone would say,
you started opening up
about previous relationships a little bit,
as it's appropriate, and someone says,
yeah, you know, he mentioned
that he was going to, you know,
send someone around to, you
know, to surveil me, you know,
that kind of thing,
which is a very interesting
factoid to pick up.
But I heard it enough times,
and people I know have reported
hearing this enough times
that I'm guessing that that's
probably more frequent than
people actually trailing people
in cars and things of that sort.
But planting that,
it's like the psychological
seed of surveillance
is a form of harassment in some sense.
- Yes, absolutely.
I think that you're right,
there's that planting
the psychological seeds,
but then also with surveillance,
some surveilers remain hidden,
so you don't know necessarily.
- Yeah, I confess in this case,
it did not act as a deterrent
for continuing the relationship,
but that's another story.
So, how often do women respond?
I have to put this in quotes
for those that are listening,
air quotes end quotes,
positively to stalk.
I mean, how often does it work
to re-secure the partner after
they've been broken up with.
- So in our studies,
it's a minority of cases
that it works to reestablish.
I think something like 15%
of the time that it works,
either to temporarily reestablish
a sexual relationship,
or lure the woman back in for
a more permanent relationship.
So most of the time it doesn't work.
But one woman in our study said,
the guy, every time she
went out with another guy,
he would threaten the other guy.
And she said after about six months,
there were no other guys.
He basically scared
off all the other guys.
And so she went back to him
because there were no other guys around.
- Yeah, I experienced this
when I was in college,
I lived in a small town,
very population dense.
Isla Vista, UC Santa Barbara.
And there was a couple
where every time this
woman would date someone,
he'd basically beat up
whoever the new suitor was.
And pretty soon no one would go near them.
They got a reputation as the
kind of Sid and Nancy couple,
and indeed it worked,
it worked in the sense that
no one dare go near her
and they ended up together.
So I've seen real life examples of this.
- Yeah, so it happens,
but it is in general,
not a successful strategy.
- Oh no, and that's not
what I'm suggesting.
I was just shocked to learn that,
'cause we hear stalking and we have this,
there's one very extreme image of it.
But the underlying motivations I think,
reveal something about mating dynamics.
- Yeah, and I think that the circumstances
are often a mate value discrepancy
where the guy realizes correctly
that he will be unable to replace her
with a mate of equivalent mate value,
or in some cases any
mate, you know, it's like,
well she was with me once,
maybe I can get her back with me again.
So the psychology is very understandable,
but it tends not to work because,
and then the other thing we found,
we did a study of 2,500
victims of stalking.
This is with Josh Duntley,
a former student of mine,
who's now a professor in
the criminology department.
And what we found is there were large sex,
large differences between the stalker
and the victim of the stalker,
where the stalker tends to be much lower
in mate value than the victim.
And so basically it's typically the woman
who realizes she can do a lot
better on the mating market,
and the guy realizes I
am never going to be able
to replace her with a woman
of equivalent mate value.
And so I'm going to use this
last ditch desperate measure
to try to get her back,
and occasionally it works.
- I'm thinking more about
this mate value thing,
this number, this metric,
the eight, ten, six,
whatever it is.
And mate value discrepancy
playing such a strong role
in all these dynamics.
I should have asked this earlier,
but what is the impact on mate value
perceived or real of a woman
having already had children?
You know, for instance, there,
friends of mine who are
married and divorced
who have children,
will often post pictures of themselves
with their children in
their online profiles,
because it shows a strong
sense of paternal instinct.
You know, there's the puppy thing.
People with dogs or puppies demonstrating
a capacity to care, and for caretaking.
In women, the opposite is also true.
Women with children show capacity,
it demonstrates fertility,
at least at one point,
perhaps fertility that's still present.
Does it positively, negatively,
or neutrally impact a woman
to already have children
when seeking another mate,
regardless of whether
or not she was married
or had the children out of wedlock?
- As a general rule,
it decreases for mate value,
because kids with another mate
are viewed as a cost, not a benefit.
And there are costs on
multiple dimensions,
one of which they're going
to be a cost to the guy,
because he's going to
have to invest resources,
time, attention, so forth,
but also a portion of
her effort and resources
are going to be devoted toward kids
who are not genetically related to him.
And which is one reason why step families,
there's often a lot of
conflict within step families,
very explicable from an
evolutionary perspective.
So in general, it's a cost, not a benefit.
Sometimes it can be a benefit though.
So I know one case where
a woman got divorced,
she had two kids and she
ended up successfully mating
with a guy who was also divorced
and had primary custody of his two kids.
And so there was a compatibility there,
but as a general rule,
it will decrease a woman's
and a man's mate value
to have kids, especially
kids who are financially,
who are young and financially dependent.
But, what happens is, let's say the woman
would be an eight without kids,
a guy who's a six might
be able to attract her
and might feel lucky to attract her,
because there's no way
he would've been able
to attract her under other conditions.
But that's why the display of effort,
investing in her kids,
is often a mating tactic.
He's showing, okay, I'm
willing to invest in kids.
I'm willing to sacrifice.
And so they in essence become
equivalent in mate value
as a result of that.
But will she be able
to attract on average,
other eights, less likely,
but the same is true of guys.
And this is why the reason
that it affects women more than men
is because more custody
tends to go with women.
That is the kids,
women tend to have greater custody,
and women tend to invest more in the kids
throughout their lives.
Now, there are other things like alimony
and child support payments, and so forth,
but all the women I've talked to,
I've talked one-on-one
with many women about this.
They view a guy with kids
as a cost, not a benefit,
unless the kids are old
enough and they've left home,
and are no longer a financially dependent.
- And everything you just
described is consistent
with what you said earlier,
which is that with subsequent marriages,
or as men get older,
the tendency is to seek mates
that are progressively younger?
- Right.
- Because there's a
higher, lower probability
they'll already have children,
if they're much younger.
- Right, right.
And if the guy's successful,
if he has status and resources
and has other qualities
associated with higher mate value,
then he will remain
attractive to younger women.
- I realize it's not your
specific area of expertise,
but these days there's a lot of discussion
about how early childhood
attachment to parents
influences mate choice later on,
this kind of general
categorization of avoidant
and anxious and anxious avoidant
and all this kind of thing.
And again, putting my hat on
as a neuroscientist, I think,
you know, it makes sense
that the neural circuits
for attachment in
childhood would be somehow,
partially or in whole,
repurposed for other forms of attachment.
We don't just tend to say, okay,
that brain circuitry was
from when I was a kid
and now I'm an adult,
and so I'll develop this
new attachment circuitry.
I'm guessing it evolves and whatnot,
but is there anything
interesting about that,
about childhood attachment strategies
vis-a-vis stability of
long-term partner choice,
or is that too big of a
leap for us to make here?
- Yeah well, I mean,
I can offer some sort of
informed speculation about it,
and as you point, it's
not my area of expertise,
but I know a little bit about it,
and I mean, I think that,
you know, a secure attachment style,
if both partners have a
secure attachment style,
that's conducive to a longterm mateship.
Avoidant attachment styles,
avoidant people tend to have
more difficulty with intimacy
and also higher probability of infidelity,
and anxious attachment style,
I don't know, can create
problems of its own, you know,
in the overly clingy dependent, you know,
absorbing what I call
high relationship load.
So, you know,
there's like mutation load,
which we all have a certain
number of mutations.
There's parasite load.
There's also what I
call relationship loads.
So what is the baggage that someone brings
to the relationship?
- Probably correlated with
the frequency of demand
of immediate text message responses.
Well, I think that the
frequency of demand,
like the latent, the expected low latency
of text message responses
plays out consistently in
relationships, you know,
early on, there's a very
low expectation of response.
And then as people get attached,
depending on their level of anxiety,
if they don't hear back from
somebody really quickly,
where the mind goes is a
very interesting aspect,
you know, do you become suspicious?
Do you become anxious?
Can you stabilize your
own internal milieu,
or do you need to see the dot
dot dot, that's coming back?
I'd love to see a study
on that at some point.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, no, that's a good one.
And my intuition suggests
that your prediction
about that would pan out.
It would be the insecure
that would really be,
you know, getting upset if there were,
if there were not that
immediate response to the texts.
- I have a friend,
a female friend who deliberately
quote unquote using her language,
trains her potential partners
to be comfortable with a
variable response latency.
But then I asked her if she's
comfortable with a variable
response latency, and
she said, absolutely not.
So there's an asymmetry,
at least in that case.
This is almost certainly
a more rare circumstance,
but I'd be remiss if I didn't ask about
unconventional relationships.
These days, I don't think
it's just by virtue of
living in California,
you hear more and more about monogamish,
as opposed to monogamous,
and various forms of
polyamory that may or may not
include the -amory part.
You know, passes and permission,
based on seasoned circumstance
and prior infidelities,
like, okay, somebody
had a mishap early on,
you know, you have one pass, so to speak,
and you hear this kind of
language getting thrown around.
And it's intriguing to me
because it seems like an effort
to bypass some of the more,
if you will, hardwired,
or at least culturally
hardwired aspects of mate choice
and sexual partner choice.
You know, acknowledging jealousy,
but confronting it by
allowing your partner
to be with somebody else, for instance.
I confess, I have friends
who have unconventional relationships.
I have friends with
conventional relationships.
Any thoughts on the polyamory.
- Yeah, I do have a
couple of thoughts on it.
I haven't studied it extensively,
but I think that the
way I would phrase it is
that there's an attempt to overcome
certain evolved
features of our mating psychology,
but often in the service of other aspects
of our mating psychology.
So what I mean by that is this.
So I talk about polyamory, first of all,
there's a sex difference,
on average, that is,
men are more likely to want to initiate
a polyamorous relationship than women.
There are lots of exceptions.
And I actually know of at least
one exception, personally,
friends of mine who were in
a polyamorous relationship,
but the motivation for men
is that evolved desire for sexual variety.
So it gives him access to a
wider variety of sex partners,
which is part of our
evolved sexual psychology,
especially for men.
Women, one motivation,
women also have a desire
for sexual variety,
on average tends not to be
as great as that of men,
but also have it.
But some women agree to a
polyamorous relationship
as a mate retention tactic.
That is, this guy in order to keep him,
she has to agree to the relationship.
And so, the motivations
for engaging in polyamory
are somewhat sex differentiated.
- [Andrew] On average.
- On average, on average,
there are lots of exceptions.
So now when it comes to sexual jealousy,
there is this recognition that there,
the way that I would frame it,
there's this evolved emotion where
it triggers sexual jealousy,
seeing your partner having sex,
or imagining your partner having sex,
or falling in love with someone else.
And, but interestingly,
and there haven't been studies on this,
but I know of this one polyamorous couple
where they reported to me,
both of them reported to me.
She said she doesn't,
it doesn't bother her
at all if her husband,
they're married, has sex with other women.
They allow it.
I think it's like every
Thursday night or whatever,
different couples that
have different rules.
But one time she saw him
walking down the street,
hand in hand affectionately
with a former girlfriend
and she got extremely jealous.
So because it signaled
an emotional connection.
So the sexual didn't bother
her, the emotional did.
She happened to be bisexual.
And her partner said
that it really upset him
when she slept with other men,
but it was fine if she
slept with other women.
- I think that's a fairly common thing
that among the men that I know
that are in polyamorous relationships,
that that's a fairly common statement.
- Yeah, and so he kept trying
these inter-nesting manipulations,
trying to encourage her
to sleep with other women,
but not with men.
And in her case,
encouraging him not to
get emotionally involved
with other women, but the sex was okay.
So I think that, you know,
I think that in the modern environment,
we have a very rich and complicated
evolved mating psychology.
And what we're doing in these
novel forms or semi-novel,
because these things have a
pretty deep history themselves,
that we're attempting to
maximize some of our evolved desires
while keeping quiescent
other evolved aspects
of our sexual psychology, like jealousy.
So satisfying or desire
for sexual variety,
but keeping jealousy at bay,
and different couples
do it in different ways,
so as you alluded to.
So I know one couple live in
Los Angeles and the woman,
the woman said,
she gives her husband
permission to have an affair,
sleep with other women,
as long it's outside of
the city limits of LA.
And this other couple, it
has to be Thursday night,
you know, and so different
people have different plans.
- Putting constraints on,
but the constraints are specific
and somewhat arbitrary
to the relationship.
- Yeah, they're specific.
And often in polyamorous relationships,
people talk it out,
and come to an agreement
on what is acceptable
and what's out of bounds.
But in a way, I mean,
it, in a way it's just,
you know, we can't change our
evolved sexual psychology,
I don't think.
What we can do is we can
activate certain elements of it,
and keep others quiescent
and that's all good.
And in a way we do in
the modern environment.
So even to take it outside of polyamory,
pornography, okay, widely
consumed internet pornography,
what does that do?
Well, there's a big sex difference there.
Men tend to consume it
a lot more than women.
The forms of the
pornography are different,
but in a way, the pornography,
what it does is it parasitized
men's evolved desire for sexual variety.
So they can,
in some sense,
psychologically experience sexual,
a variety of different women sexually
without actually doing it,
by just looking at their computer screen.
And so, in a way,
another way of phrasing that,
is that we create modern
novel cultural inventions
in ways that satisfy our evolved desires
and our evolved sexual desires.
- Yeah, it's interesting with the
kind of explosion of online pornography.
I have a colleague at Stanford
in psychiatry, Anna Lembke,
who studies the dopamine system,
and she mentioned two things of interest.
One is that not only is
there a tremendous variety
of experiences that are available
to people to view in pornography,
but the intensity is also quite high,
so much so that at least for young people
who are observing a lot of pornography,
it's possible, and there are
studies looking at this now,
that their brain circuits become wired
to observing sexual acts,
as opposed to being engaged in them,
which can be extremely problematic.
So it's a sharp blade, so to
speak this pornography thing.
It isn't what it once was,
and it's evolving quickly.
Very interesting.
So how should one frame all this?
So I imagine the number
of people listening
are in relationships, or would
hope to be in a relationship.
In terms of understanding
what we are selecting for,
consciously or subconsciously,
it seems like there are common themes.
It's people want to feel
attractive and attracted.
People want to make sure
that there's stability
of the relationship.
So when we hear about security,
oftentimes I think of this
kind of warm, oxytocin,
serotonin like thing,
but this mate value, it seems
so powerful in all this,
assessing mate value.
So how objective are people
about assessing their own value
in terms of finding,
securing, and over time,
maintaining a relationship.
Securing is dynamic,
because people age at different rates.
Is there an objective
metric of this stuff?
I guess you get a lot of
statistics about somebody's image,
and you come up with an average value
based on the population,
but how should people assess themselves?
Because it seems like one of the features
that would be very powerful
for leading to happiness,
of good partner selection,
with that stable,
where one doesn't have to
resort to these Machiavellian,
or diabolical, or any of
these other strategies,
would be to be very honest with oneself.
And how does one do that?
- Yeah, great questions.
And, I don't think that the
science all the answers,
so a couple things.
So one is that I think
people are generally
pretty good at self-assessing mate value.
And even self-esteem has been hypothesized
to be one internal monitoring
device that tracks mate value.
So when we get a promotion at work,
or we get a rise in status,
we feel an elevated sense of self-esteem.
We get fired, we get
rejected, we get ostracized,
our self-esteem plummets.
So, our self-evaluation,
I think does track mate
value to some extent.
There are people who
overestimate their mate value,
people high on narcissism in particular,
and some people underestimate
their mate value.
Another important element is that there's
consensual mate value.
So that is if you asked a
group of a hundred people,
there's a fair amount of consensus
that this person's an
eight, that person's a six.
But there are also individual
differences in mate value.
So one example is I know a woman
who's a professor and she
places a high premium on guys
who are deeply steeped
in Russian literature,
which she is, so that she can have
in-depth conversations
about Russian literature.
- Note to young men,
learn Russian literature.
- Well, but this is high,
and it's a dimension of mate
value that's important for her,
but probably not important
for a lot of other people.
And so, whereas other
people let's say might be,
let's say you're into
football or some sport,
and the other partner
thinks sports are stupid,
you know, then that's, you know,
someone who's also into sports
is going to be higher
in mate value for you.
So there are these individual differences
in components of mate
value, which is good,
because that means if everyone
were going after the same people,
and there was total
consensus on mate value,
then there would be a
lot of mateless people,
and a lot of problems in the world,
and a lot of dissatisfied people.
So, both are important,
the consensual aspects
and the individually
differentiated components of mate value.
But in terms of accuracy of assessment,
there are no good measures
scientifically to do this,
because it's sufficiently complicated.
So I mentioned, you know,
we've mentioned maybe half,
maybe a dozen different
components of mate value,
physical attractiveness,
kindness, emotional stability,
health status, et cetera.
And these aren't the only ones.
So I teach a course on
psychology of human mating.
And I ask the people, it's a large course,
a couple of hundred people,
tell me, what do women want in a mate?
And so I start it with the blackboard.
This is back in the old days
when there was a blackboard, a
piece of chalk, and they say,
I want a mate who has
a good sense of humor.
So I write sense of humor.
Intelligent, kind.
And so I go through this, and
I go through five blackboards,
and then I run out of
space, over what women want.
Now I do the same for men,
and men kind of run out of space
after about a blackboard and a half.
But what that tells me
is that these qualities
are large in number and
complicated in nature.
So you say you want a guy
who's nice and generous?
And they say, yeah.
So like a guy who at
the end of every month
takes his whole paycheck
and gives it to the
wino, a homeless person.
Well no, not that generous,
generous toward me,
but not toward everyone else.
Nice in general,
but not so nice that
they're getting exploited.
So, or even, now there's something,
you can't be too healthy.
So if you put it, that's uni-dimensional,
but you want a guy,
women want a guy who's
confident, but not too confident,
because too confident will
mean he's either arrogant,
narcissistic, or not
sufficiently manipulable.
So anyway, my point is that
because there are so many
different components of mate value,
and that they vary in amount.
So it's not just listing the
qualities and summing them up.
They vary in amount.
It's a very complicated
endeavor to assess accurately,
but I think people have
a good intuitive sense
of people's relative mate value,
especially if you're in a group
and you've been able to interact
with them for a long time.
And one indication is, again,
that attention structure.
How many other people
will really want to mate with this person?
That's a good cue that
they're high in mate value.
Nobody wants to mate with you,
then cue that your low in mate value.
- Reminds of the time when
one is trying to decide
who to ask to the prom.
There's a complicated assessment
based on who one would like to go with,
whether or not you're already partnered,
who would say yes, who would say no,
because there's a risk in rejection too,
because that if I'm guessing correctly,
could lower one's own
perceived mate value.
- Getting rejected.
- Right.
Frequency of rejections probably
doesn't lend itself well
to increasing one's own
view of their mate value.
- Right, which is why many guys have
what I call mating anxiety.
That is, they don't approach women
because they risk getting shot down.
- They're trying to maintain that number,
by reducing the amount of data.
- [David] Right.
- Very interesting.
- But it backfires in
the modern environment.
So, there's a famous
psychologist, Albert Ellis,
who had mating anxiety and
he assigned himself the task
of asking, like,
I can't remember what the number was,
but let's say 50 women out on dates.
He lived in New York City,
so there was a lot of women.
- He could just stand still
and they would stream past him.
- And he asked 50 women on a
date, you know, every week.
And he said, after two weeks
his mating anxiety disappeared,
because most of them said, buzz off creep,
[indistinct]
Actually getting rejected didn't
cause my world to collapse.
And it actually was okay.
And so he kind of inured
himself to this rejection.
And so it ended up,
he ended up doing quite
well on his mating life.
- Another point for cognitive
behavioral desensitization.
- [David] Exactly.
- He ran the experiment.
Just a couple more questions.
Earlier, you mentioned
self-deception-based deception,
or something of that sort.
Self-deception that people aren't
always trying to convince
somebody else of something
that secretly they know isn't true,
but that they deceive themselves.
Could you embellish on that a little bit?
- Well, this is actually, this hypothesis
is the famous evolutionary
biologist, Robert Trivers,
first advanced this
hypothesis in the preface,
in 1976 to Dawkins'
book, The Selfish Gene.
And he's subsequently
written more about it,
both in scientific article
and in a more popular book.
But the idea is, the core idea
is that successful deception
is facilitated by self-deception.
So if you really believe that in X,
then you're going to be a
more successful salesman
to convince other people of X.
So if you believe you're,
let's say a 10 in mate value,
you truly believe it, even if you're not,
I'm going to have a more successful time
convincing you that I am as well.
And so the hypothesis is basically
that people self-deceive
in order to increase
the effectiveness of actual deception.
But I think that there are people who
are so in one other
dimension I'll mention too,
is that as that animals
often take each other
at our own word for things.
So if we're self-confident,
people assume that we must have the goods
to back up that self-confidence.
If we're a quivering mass of insecurity,
people believe, well,
we don't have the goods
to back up anything.
And so people use other people's displays
of their self-confidence
as a cue to their goods.
And it's in general,
a pretty reliable cue,
but then they are over
overestimates and underestimates,
as we've talked about,
like with narcissism.
- Yeah, we see this
with the job candidates.
You are taught to look very
carefully at the application
and consider all aspects,
but ultimately you consider
that also in light of, you know,
how firmly someone believes in the vision
of what they're trying to
bring to the profession.
And that's a, I think, largely
a subconscious process,
and being aware of it
can be helpful, but yeah,
when somebody is confident
and you tend to think that
they're going to get where
they say they're going to go
and it acts as a bit of a heuristic,
for not needing, the impulses,
that one then doesn't need
to go vet all the information
quite as carefully.
But if, I guess if one
is aware of it, then,
you know, to dig deeper,
because it seems like there's
a lot of deception going on.
- Yeah well,
and something we talked about earlier,
people high on psychopathy
are very good at deception.
I don't know whether they
are good at self-deception,
or whether they're just
really good deceivers.
But they can be very effective.
Out in California, you
live out in California,
I'm sure you've seen your
fair share of cases like that.
- Oh yeah, I think,
across today's discussion and
various examples pop to mind
of seeing these features in humans.
It's so interesting.
I find the work that you
do incredibly interesting.
I think this field of
evolutionary psychology
is fascinating.
And, I hope, I said it
before, but I'll say it again.
I feel like neuroscience
and evolutionary psychology
are nudging towards one another.
And it's only a matter
of time before they merge
in some formal way.
I mean, there is the work for instance,
on polygamous versus
monogamous [indistinct],
and levels of vasopressin,
but it's a big leap to go from vasopressin
in a [indistinct],
no disrespect to that beautiful work,
but to humans and say, oh,
vasopressin inhaler are going to make you
monogamous or something.
I think that's probably got the direction
of the effect wrong,
but you get the point.
- Yeah, no, I think
you're absolutely right.
And I think it will happen.
I think it's starting to happen.
And it will happen because
getting at the neuroscience
is getting at the underlying mechanisms
that are driving the process.
So, you know,
what an evolutionary
perspective brings to bear,
is evolved function and
ultimate explanation,
the selective forces
that created adaptations,
the functions of those adaptations,
and the neuroscience brings well,
what is the underlying machinery
that these mechanisms are instantiated in?
- It'd be wonderful to
collaborate someday.
Maybe we'll do a brain imaging study
on jealousy or something,
and I don't know, you're the psychologist.
You would come up with the
beautiful experimental design.
I'm certain that people are going to want
to learn more about your work.
Certainly we will give them links
to your social media
and other other sites.
You've written a tremendous number
of really interesting books.
Tell us about your most recent book,
and maybe some of the others,
that if people are
interested in these topics,
and they want to learn more,
that they could explore.
- Sure.
Okay so, well,
my most recent book is
called, When Men Behave Badly:
The Hidden Roots of Sexual Deception,
Harassment, and Assault,
and that book deals with
conflict between the sexes,
sexual conflict.
And so it deals with them both
in what I call mating market conflicts.
Some of the topics we've
been talking about,
deception in internet
dating, and things like that.
Second is conflict that occurs
within mating relationships,
of the sort that we've
been talking about as well,
financial infidelity,
emotional infidelity,
sexual infidelity,
coping with conflict
within a relationship.
And I actually have some suggestions
for strategies for coping with conflict
within a relationship.
Coping in dealing with
the aftermath of breakups.
So often there's an asymmetry.
One person wants to break
up, the other doesn't.
So I talk about coping in the aftermath.
And then I also talk in this
book, When Men Behave Badly,
about some of the darker
sides of human mating,
like intimate partner violence,
stalking, sexual
harassment, sexual coercion.
So that's what that book's about.
And I think it,
it's gotten well-reviewed
and people find it
very useful in understanding
what is otherwise a lot
of baffling phenomena.
Why do men and women seem
at odds with each other
in so many domains?
Why does some of these recurrent forms
of sexual conflict occur?
So that's what that book's about.
My previous book, so my first book,
which I've had the good fortune
to be able to revise a couple of times,
deals more broadly with
human mating strategies.
It's called, The Evolution of Desire:
Strategies of Human Mating.
And it gives people a broad overview
of what people want in a mate,
tactics of attraction,
tactics of mate retention,
and so forth, throughout
the whole mating process,
serial mating, causes of
divorce, and so forth.
And then even more broadly,
I have a textbook called,
Evolutionary Psychology:
The New Science of the Mind,
which is in its sixth edition right now,
and it's the most widely used textbook
in evolutionary psychology
around North America and Europe.
And actually it's been translated
even into Arabic and other countries.
So that deals somewhat with mating,
but also deals with survival problems,
our evolved fears and phobias,
issues about kin and family,
extended family, friendships,
social hierarchy,
status hierarchies,
warfare, and other topics.
So the evolutionary psychology textbook
is the broadest book.
And then maybe the second broadest is
The Evolution of Desire:
Strategies of Human Mating.
And then for those interested
in conflict between the sexes,
the latest book, When Men Behave Badly.
- Fantastic.
I love your work.
I'm so grateful for the
clarity and depth and rigor
with which you do it,
and you convey it to us.
I know I speak for many people
when I just want to say thank you.
This is a tremendously
informative conversation.
- Thank you.
Well, it's been a delight to talk with you
and I hope we do engage in
that research collaboration
of merging neuroscience and
evolutionary psychology.
- Let's do it.
- All right.
- Great,
thank you David.
- Thank you.
- Thank you for joining me
for my conversation
with Doctor David Buss.
Be sure to check out
the link to his website
in the show caption, and be
sure to check out his new book,
When Men Behave Badly: The Hidden Roots
of Sexual Deception,
Harassment, and Assault.
If you're learning from
and/or enjoying this podcast,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
That's a terrific zero
cost way to support us.
In addition, please put
any questions you have
in the comment section on YouTube,
and also in the comment section,
you can make suggestions
about future topics for the podcast,
or future podcast guests that
you would like us to host.
Also check out our sponsors
mentioned at the beginning of the podcast.
That's one of the best ways to support us.
In addition, please
subscribe to the podcast
on Apple and/or Spotify.
And on Apple, you can leave
us up to a five star review,
and you can also provide
us questions and feedback.
We also have a Patreon, it's
patreon.com/andrewhuberman.
And there you can support this podcast
at any level that you like.
In many episodes of the
Huberman Lab podcast,
we discuss supplements.
While supplements might
not be for everybody,
many people derive
tremendous benefit from them,
for things like sleep and focus
and other aspects of human
performance in daily life.
One issue with supplements
is that many of the
supplement companies out there
are subpar with respect to quality,
and they are not precise
about the specific amounts
of the various supplement
contents that they include.
For that reason, we've
partnered with Thorne,
T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne supplements
are known to have the
highest levels of stringency,
in terms of the quality
of the ingredients,
and the precision of the
amounts of the ingredients.
In other words,
what's listed on the label is
what's actually in the bottle.
If you want to see what
supplements I take,
you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman.
There, you can see the supplements I take.
You can get 20% off any
of those supplements.
And if you navigate further
into the Thorne site,
through that portal,
thorne.com/u/huberman,
you can also get 20% off
any of the other supplements
that Thorne makes.
Thank you once again,
for joining me for my discussion
with Doctor David Buss
about human mate selection and strategy,
and many other extremely
interesting topics today,
and last but not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
[rock music]